messing up and making repair showing
them how that's done showing them that
we're all human and that we get to love
our mistakes and that we get to own them
and then that lets us grow I think
that's just as important as being a
perfect parent and that
opportunity only comes because we will
undoubtedly [__] up our kids in some way
[Music]
hey everybody it's Joe Hudson and today
we have a unique uh experience for you
Brett is not with us unfortunately um
but Nathan bashes is with us and Nathan
let's tell them a little bit about you
and then how
this situation came to be like how how
we're sitting here talking I saw a tweet
of yours that really caught my eye
because I have I'm also a dad and I have
two kids now I had one kid at the time
when we tweeted about this and then my
second one was born um but you tweeted a
question I often get asked is how I
raised my two daughters people who meet
them are impressed and want to know what
technique we used the answer is that
there was no time where my wife and or I
ever punished them and if we ever shamed
them we apologized immediately which I
thought was amazing so I replied would
read 5K words on this and then you said
hey you could come on our podcast and
ask questions if that's appealing um and
here I am it is appealing it sounds
amazing yeah awesome so all right that's
the story that's what what we're set up
here to do Nathan's going to ask me
questions about parenting I'm going to
answer maybe to start just like can you
take me back to you're in a similar spot
as me your first child is kind of like
getting into the toddler years and and
you all of a sudden the problems become
a little more complicated did you always
kind of feel like you knew basically the
approach you wanted to take or did you
you had to come to it over time yeah I'm
curious to hear the story yeah so the
story is I was not I did not get blessed
with great parents and they loved me and
they cared but they had no idea what
they were doing you know when our first
daughter was born for example my mom
recommended that we have a schedule to
change the diaper on because they the
baby needed to learn how to poop on our
schedule and and and then told us that
they kind of enjoy sitting in poop uh so
it's like a mud bath I think the quote
was right and so like
everybody when I had a kid I started
parenting the way
that I was parented like that's the
automatic thing to do and uh so I I was
rather horrible at it frankly but my
wife had is a researcher and so she also
was not raised in the best possible way
but had some really good infant
experiences and
so she started
researching and she did she found
hand-in-hand parenting and we had some
people in our community Who had who were
doing hand inand parenting which is
Patty whiffler book listen and that's
the organization my wife and I actually
listen we have had a couple different
like long drives and so we listen to the
audiobook together and we like
frequently pause and talk about it and
stuff like that which is an amazing
experience great way to do it I I I
can't tell you how many people I have
recommended to who aren't parents who
have taken a huge amount from the
book and totally and and on a personal
level something that's important for me
to say is that it is one of the most
important practices of my life as far as
a spiritual or self-development practice
is the stay listening and the play
listening part of hand in hand has has
changed my life dramatically and deeply
informs the work that we do particularly
the work that we do in um live uh in
live like weekl long intensives it's tot
incredibly important part part of my our
work and I'm really excited to learn
learn about yours and what you what you
kind of taken from that and then what
what also you would add so I was
wrestling her with hand inand parenting
I'm like what like you're we're letting
the kid cry like where what's
happening um and she found it when Esme
was probably about a year and a half
maybe two years old yeah uh our oldest
and she was right you know she started
doing the tools I was not supportive she
was 100% correct I saw that she was
correct and so two things changed one I
became a huge fan of hand inhand
parenting and the other thing that
happened was I at this point I was like
okay babe you're the CEO of the house
and your decision is what stands from
now on I am going to do whatever you
suggest yeah which also was a incredibly
good choice um for us but that's how I
that's how I ran into hand-in-hand
parenting and the the the tag the end of
that story was when I started doing hand
andh parenting part of the the thought
process
was you know you let them have their big
emotions as I sat with their big
emotions I had to sit with the emotions
that I was not
allowed and so and and now today when
I'm teaching I'll say something like if
you want to know who wasn't allowed to
cry just wait for a baby crying on a
plane stand up and look at all the faces
and whoever is really freaking agitated
were the the people who weren't allowed
to cry yeah and so that was the that and
when I saw that when I was when I felt
how my life was changing because of the
way that I was parenting then I was
completely hooked amazing well I'm
curious what are kind of like the main
the main ideas so big pillars were I
wouldn't even say letting them cry so
how I would say it is it is you said
earlier like it gets more complex right
and to me the only added complexity is
at the like the two to seven range is
connection so it's like are they wellfed
are they thirsty are they are you know
are they tired and those three things
and then are do they feel connected yeah
and if they don't feel connected then
they need to have a big emotion have a
big emotional release they need to be
loved in that and then they get back to
connection I don't know if you've
experienced this but
my my second when she needed connection
she'd literally sit on my lap grab my
face and point my face to her face and
force eye contact you know or you see
little kids if you're disregulated your
nervous system is disregulated you'll
see them say I love you Daddy some way
to like hey let's get back into
connection yeah and so to me it's as
simple as that and then the other
pillars
which are
more about the map or the path that I
would say well the thing that Waldorf
taught me was just the age
appropriateness of certain things I'm
not supposed to logically talk to my
seven-year-old when you see parents go
okay well let me logically explain to
you why you shouldn't cross the street
or something like that the kid you see
the kid they're responding to the
emotional
n of the of the parent so oftentimes
when parents go into logic they kind of
settle down a little bit get a little
grounded and then they're just
describing something but they could
literally be talking about the sun and
the stars and if they hit that same
quality
of emotion and and nervous system
regulation the kid you'll see the kid
settle as well and I used to I actually
did that experiment a couple times um so
that was a huge one that was a huge
pillar was
what are they what how do I actually
approach them at six how do I actually
approach them at seven how do I and
Define the big changes there's a huge
change that happens between seven and 8
more of their will comes
online more of the
um more of them wanting to be away from
the parents you know the first one's
kind of two and a half three what they
call the terrible twos yeah is a first
force of will they kind of leave moms
you know energetic field or or nervous
system field and then there's the next
one's at 78 in that area and in walf
education they say that's when you start
teaching them intellectual stuff before
that you're teaching them how
to how to uh use their will yeah and and
that one I remember that moment you know
when our kids were seven or
eight and my sister's kids knew knew
three languages and our kids knew one
and hadn't really learned how to read
yet um but but I remember talking to
somebody and saying oh you know they
don't speak these languages and my
friend said to me I love this changed my
life he said uh he said you know you can
hire someone to speak a language for you
but you can't hire someone to have your
will and I just like went through all
the CEOs I know and I was like yep that
like absolutely the thing that makes
them successful is not a skill set it's
the way that they are in the world yeah
and then they can develop the skill set
or you can hire the skill set and it
totally put me at peace so so that that
was the that piece to really understand
that the first eight years are all about
them learning about their will learning
how to be in their body and then the
second one which isn't just 0 to 8 years
old this pillar was so important to us
and it
was their job isn't to listen to us
their job is to listen to themselves H I
do not want my child to do what I say I
want my child to learn how to listen to
themselves and say oh that feels good
that doesn't feel good that feels right
that doesn't feel
right and that was critical and and it
took weird things to do and this was
Tara who first introduced the idea of so
for instance if they do a great great
thing we don't say good job we'll say oh
how does that feel H oh I see that that
makes you feel great inside that's
cool constantly reflecting back to them
their internal state so that they listen
and and behind that is a theory that
kids are just basically good the humans
are basically good and if they listen to
themselves we have a inherent morality
for lack of a better word we have an
inherent goodness in us that if we're
listening we're going to do and and if
you look at the people who are more
likely say to get addicted or more
likely to be in a job for 40 years and
hate it those are people who haven't
really learned how to listen to
themselves yeah you know and so that was
that was another huge pillar for us
that's so fascinating how did you
approach I mean cuz let's say it's you
know the classic grocery store right I
want this I want that I want the other
thing the thing that I didn't know
before reading the book listen was what
that's really about is definitely not
the thing they think they want or they
say they want right it's just a feeling
of disconnection and it actually might
be that the whole point of this exercise
that they're doing is not to get the
thing it's to trigger you because any
form of connection even if it's you
yelling at them is better than
disconnection because disconnection is
abandonment and abandonment is is death
for a child and so um just keeping you
close any way they can is kind of like
what they're doing and they're actually
doing it in a very smart way because
likely you wouldn't have I mean I
wouldn't have paid attention to them I
think when parents myself at least often
are like I'd like you to listen to me
it's I'd like you to behave in such a
way that allows us to do basic things
kind of quickly you know like let's get
out the door let's brush your teeth at
night and get to bed all those kind of
things that parents I think are probably
one of the most common struggles how did
you approach that especially keeping in
mind this so interesting thing that you
said of like the goal is not to get them
to listen to me right yeah yeah so yeah
it's a great question so I have a
classic story and I've heard the story
before but then it actually happened to
me I was in a Whole Foods she starts
wanting something and starts throw in a
fit and I sit in the aisle of the store
and I had made The Logical
Choice my reputation is not as important
as my child's
upbringing so I don't
whatever I'm going to sit here and do
this thing and it was like we were like
6 minutes in she's yelling I'm
containing her so that she's not hurting
herself or me or the groceries and this
old lady we live in a kind of hippie
town and this Old Hippie lady comes over
and is like are you okay dear and my
daughter just from screaming stops and
goes I'm just having my emotions and
then she goes back to screaming I'm sure
the hippie lady respected
that she was definitely trying to figure
out if I was [__] up as a parent
there's no doubt that's what was going
down is this man bothering you exactly
and um and that was when I realized oh
there's some like you said there's some
cognition underneath it that they know
something that I I I did not think that
she understood what was happening at
that level yeah at the same
time without a doubt there was moments
where I just knew I didn't have a in me
my day was X Y and Z I did I was
surprised by how inconsistent I could be
and still get great results meaning yeah
the job is to be patient with them as
they're having a big emotion I would say
it's to sit in loving attention like if
you can't be in loving attention then
get your wife have her be in loving
attention and if you just can't do it at
all then it's also okay to say to a kid
like I just can't being loving attention
with you right now we're just got to we
just got to leave the store yeah and
that's totally fine they they'll
understand that which is
interesting but the so for me it was
more important to be in loving attention
than it was to be consistent yeah that
is a very important distinction because
I do think in the book it's kind of
um she does a good job making it clear
but it's easy to imagine misinterpreting
like well you just need to sit there
with them for me personally I know my
limits as of today I would not be able
to be in loving attention in a grocery
store for five minutes which sounds like
it's easy to just say it real quick
that's an eternity you know like even 30
seconds and it's an eternity yeah
yeah yeah a and you learn so much by
doing it there's a couple things that I
realize in the process that relate to
self-development of of
adults one is you know the quality of my
listening to you is going to affect the
conversation that we have it's going to
affect how connected you feel as an
adult and this is the same with a kid so
that was one of the things that it
taught me the other thing that it taught
me was that kids excitement is as
bothersome to some people as kids
crying yeah it's like oh wait the
emotions that we're having it's not just
the negative ones that people have
problems with it's the positive ones
Settle Down Johnny you know it's
something you hear all the time so that
was another to see that oh some people
are going to be annoyed with my kid cuz
they're happy cuz they're squealing and
joy like whoa what's up with that yeah
so that was that was an interesting one
like many limiting beliefs have the same
emotional
cycle and that emotional cycle comes
from a little kid trying to get
Attunement you as a little kid how do I
get Attunement so if I get the
Attunement by fighting with you by
making a
Ruckus then I'm going to grow up making
a Ruckus to get that connection from My
Wife and from my husband and from if I
grew up being sad and that got the
attention then I'm going to be sad in
these different situations or whatever
it is and so there's this recognition
that these moments of Attunement how how
do they get our attention like that's
what you're teaching them and then that
emotional
cycle basically
underlies so much yeah of the limiting
beliefs that they'll have in the rest of
their lives the things that hold them
back for the rest of their lives will be
attached to that emotional cycle it is
interesting just reflecting on my own
childhood like I do kind of feel like I
have this emotional cycle of um you know
sitting at a desk coloring on some
paper going to my mom being like look at
what I did and my mom's personality is
to be very oh my gosh that's amazing you
know right and it's kind of funny cuz I
mean I'm still today instead of it
coloring and you know at my desk I'm I'm
you know at whatever vs code right
tweeting about it hoping that people
tell me oh Nathan that's amazing you
know right giving me lots of likes and
retweets on Twitter um and uh you know
then then I go back to the drawing board
do you ever get the feeling of just like
how you kind of feel like you're doing a
job but also it's a terrifying
responsibility to be like someone else's
pattern is kind of B it's going to be
shaped by me and like my wife and the
other cuz it feels impossible to not
have some way of oh it is impossible
there's no way you're not going to [__]
up your kids you know there's just no
way and but what I have I have a story
about that recently so so like I said
Esme was older when we started doing
hand inhand parenting and I was not a
great parent at the beginning by any
stretch my attachment Style with her was
to you know if she had big emotions was
to not go into loving attention it was
either getting frustrated or removing
myself and she was teenager she's 16 17
years old and she has a a boyfriend and
she's in this problem with the boyfriend
and I can't remember exactly what it was
but it was an attachment issue and I
literally said to
her oh that's not his fault that's not
your fault that's me I taught you that
attachment thing like that was what I
did when you were a kid and I am so
sorry I still get Misty thinking about
it and
um and she cried and I cried and we just
sat there and cried together she knew it
was true I knew it was
true and it was just that was it it was
just done that pattern in her life was
done that's all that was required she
was either young enough or like that
moment of connection just allowed that
thing to fall and the relationship with
her boyfriend went to the next level
and and um I remember thinking kind of
wish I would have [__] her up more I
want more of those
moments
so which is another big tenant for us
you know one of the ways that I looked
at especially the young kids was
eventually I looked at it
was am I treating them with the same
respect that I'm treating an adult yeah
now I have to teach them so I get that
but I can teach them in respectful way I
can teach them in a disrespectful way
and so part of that oh I'm going to
treat them with the respect was that if
I did something like shame them I would
apologize I would say oh I'm like that's
not how I want to be with you yeah and
that repair is just as important as
getting it
right if there's if you get it perfect
and you never make repair I don't think
that's as good for a kid as messing up
and making repair showing them how
that's done showing them that we're all
human and that we get to love our
mistakes and that we get to own them and
then that lets us grow I think that's
just as important as being a perfect
parent and that
opportunity only comes because we will
undoubtedly [__] up our kids in some way
so for me that's just as important I
think that that well brings someone two
things one really quick is just the Deep
wisdom of the Buddhist like principle of
don't resist things yeah like it's hard
to express but it's like you said an
opportunity that creates a lot of beauty
and also is super important because no
one in this world is perfect and so to
model what to do with our imperfections
is important the the second thing I
reminds me of is um the idea that the
emotional connection and repair leads to
transformation yeah I have noticed even
after just literally weeks of and I was
n horrible about this before so it's not
like we're going from zero to one I'm
going from more like 50% to maybe 80% or
something like that yeah I have noticed
a change a noticeable change in behavior
in certain moments oh yeah where it just
she feels a little calmer yeah like it's
so apparent to me from in a way that it
had never was before I was a parent that
like the default for a human being is
really very sweet and very good yeah and
there are moments where we get out of
whack with that everybody gets out of
whack but that's the default that's the
Baseline and that was like what a
amazing thing to learn that part is
really critical that that part like that
lesson for me in hand inhand parenting
informed the way that we do our work and
the way that I relate it to myself so
deeply because most people have this
incredibly critical voice in their head
that goes off all the time right there's
all sorts of ways that this
presents all of it assumes that you're
not good yeah all of it assumes that
you're not going to evolve naturally
that you're not here to learn that
you're not in an evolutionary state but
your essence is good like and when I saw
that when I saw oh all she needs is
connection and then her expression in
the world is so much goodness MH I was
like oh like that where the connection
course came from yeah which is just like
oh this is this is if people can feel
connected
the goodness just happens naturally if
people feel connected with themselves
the goodness just happens naturally and
I see it all the time and that doesn't
mean nice it means good like
compassionate yeah good to themselves
yeah totally and and the thing that this
connects to that you said earlier too is
um
like it is an intelligent and adaptive
thing to do when you're feeling
disconnected to trigger
attent loving attention in whatever way
you need to or can and so you go there's
a huge frame shift of like my child
screwing up to like oh my child's making
it obvious to me who I I probably could
have noticed earlier if I was paying
closer attention right what she needs
right now yeah and I think that has
helped me a ton and I never ever thought
about it before it's much easier not not
easy always but it's a lot easier to be
in loving attention when you have that
reframe and what you're doing in that
moment is is you're teaching
her this selft talk
of oh you're smart you're adaptive
you're trying to get to connection
that's a good thing instead of oh see
when you're angry you're wrong you're
[__] up you're making a mistake how
long is it going to be till you make
that mistake again and if what I'm
saying sounds to a listener's voice in
the head that's because your mom said
that to you or your dad said that to you
like that's how that [__] goes down yeah
and so that reframing you isn't just
reframing it for you to make it easier
to be compassionate to them it's
reframing it for them so they can be
more compassionate to themselves
themselves and that is that just got me
really misty because
um uh my daughter I don't remember what
happened but I I only feel like maybe
this was like one or maybe two times
where I was like why are you crying like
that and she's only two and a half she's
echoed back to me several times after
she cried
why was I crying like that yeah oh my
God the selft talk that I just gave her
yeah it makes it very real to me when I
hear my daughter who's so young say back
to me the things that I've said to her
in those moments and it's like I said
that to you once or twice and it really
stuck with you you really remembered
that it made a big imprint yeah it's
amazing how that works yeah yeah yeah I
can I I want to just point one thing out
for parents who are like no you got to
shame your kid I'll just say the
following notice that everything you
shame your kid for hasn't changed yeah
it doesn't [__]
change you shame your kid for something
I guarantee they'll be 16 years old
still doing it you could at a distance
look at it like you know pasture raised
hins with like their eggs or whatever
it's like ah it's more expensive but
like you should do it this way because
it's like healthier or better for the
environment or for the child or whatever
right like no it's like as if those eggs
Were Somehow cheaper like way cheaper
the biggest investment is it's like a
savings account if you put $10,000 in
when you're one years old and when
you're 18 it's better than putting
$100,000 well depending on the interest
rate but whatever $50,000 in when you're
the you know I have a great relationship
with my
teenagers I I love them I love hanging
out with them yeah I don't have any of
the teenage issues that all the other
parents I know had
like my college age daughter came home
and was like how do we get alone time
and we went up to our cabin in the woods
and so it
just the the amount of time that you
have to spend after 8 years old is so
much less than everybody else I've ever
seen there is there is
absolutely an upfront thing but you're
right even in The Upfront investment
that feels like oh my God I'm taking
extra time it even makes those days
easier yeah because you're not fighting
with yourself yeah yeah I don't because
we have that inherent goodness there's
something in all of us when we're
shaming our kid that doesn't feel good
I've never met somebody who's shaming
their kid and then they're like I feel
great about that you know like oh my god
did you see me shame that kid that was
awesome I'm such a good parent for
shaming that kid like it
feels yeah people feel like [__] when
they when they do that kind of thing
like so yeah yeah if there's one thing I
could airdrop like everyone it really
might be this like this might be the
single most crucial intervention point
to like improve Society broadly because
it's it's the old saying like hurt
people hurt people kind of a thing I
couldn't think of a better chid engine
on the planet yeah if everybody raised
their kids with that deep Attunement and
attachment and prioritizing connection
our world would be extremely different
in 25 years it really does tangibly feel
like it would and it does feel
incredibly rare like feels like this
kind of thing that you learn it it has
very low cost very big benefit even in
the short run really huge benefit in the
long run privately and publicly for
society it's one of those things that
just sort of feels like um you know um
an important an important thing
culturally you mentioned something that
I think would be cool to touch on
is call it listening call it
connection you know call it stay
listening whatever you want to call it
like it changes adults Behavior just as
quickly if somebody feels deeply
listened to if you're in a fight with
your wife and all of a sudden they feel
deeply listened to the fight changes if
you are in a fight with
your employee and they feel deeply
listened to then the fight
changes it's this is not a this isn't a
skill set just for kids and my my whole
life is so much less dramatic and so
much easier and so much less
conflict and everywhere where there's
still some semblance of
like it's because there's a way in which
people aren't feeling listened to it's
an amazing skill set and it's so simple
so you know handin hand has these five
tools stay listening play listening and
one of them is you know gentle but firm
boundaries yeah and what I notice is
that you know if
I'm if you don't boundary a kid it's a
really bad thing right like and you said
like it's even sometimes like twisting
the knife of like oh yeah I see that you
want that cookie you can't have that
cookie that that boundary often times
what humans seem to do is they think oh
I can be loving but that means I have to
be nice right and nice equals not being
boundaried yeah and that is such it's
actually oh no it's it's a very boundar
if you want to have great relationships
with people it's it's about being very
boundar and I have a whole episode on
boundaries but boundaries isn't saying
No Boundaries is saying what I'm going
to do boundaries isn't cutting off love
boundaries is saying this is what I have
to do so that I can stay with an open
heart with you in the book there's not a
lot of time spent on uh how parents can
do this together that are married yeah
it's it seems like a lot of it is from
the perspective of a single parent with
a child and and the core pillars are
stay listening play listening setting
gentle but firm limits and then the
other one is uh having a listening
partner who is specifically not your
spouse who because the spouse there's
like Stakes we all need support
structures beyond our immediate spouse
but the the husband and wife or or
spousal relationship is like so crucial
to this and um
I'm curious kind of you know what you
would add on that front yeah so couple
tricks that Taran I had one is that we
had a we helped each other see the
moments when we weren't able and when we
weren't capable and so that was a really
important thing to be able to have an
agreement of oh if I say this word you
you you walk away and I walk in yeah you
know that was a really important to help
because sometimes when you're out of
your nervous system when you're
disregulated it's hard hard to see that
you're not being
useful um so that's one thing that I
think is really useful the other thing
that's re was incredibly useful was Tara
and I made parenting
a a self-development practice or a
spiritual practice and and to have
someone to talk to about that on a
regular basis was huge so it is uh oh
this is what I'm learning this is what I
want to take away here's how I want to
parent this is how I want to take the
lessons of parenting into the world this
is how I've grown this is how it's
changed for me that was an incredibly
useful part and it kept us on point with
the parenting but it more importantly it
kept
us growing and developing as humans that
your kids are going to change you
there's this cool thing that my wife has
been reading about recently and she
basically says that the way that it's
supposed to go is that a parent is
supposed to be putting all their
caretaking towards the kid and the kid
is not supposed to be caretaking the
parent they're not supposed to be doing
that and that a lot of the pain that
adults have is because
they're they care tick their parents H
oh I'm going to do X Y and Z so that Mom
is happy I'm going to take care of Dad's
depress depression or whatever when that
when the caretaking goes the other way
that creates a lot of problems in adult
life it prevents us from attuning to
ourselves it prevents us from being able
to actually be in connection with oursel
there's a whole bunch of stuff there and
when you start taking the parenting as a
as a practice is something that you get
to learn and grow from because what's
actually happening is though all the
need all the Care taking is going
towards the kid both of you are growing
there's a huge amount of development
that happens there's nobody
who's you know walked away from
parenting and said I haven't changed a
bit like it it doesn't happen and so
having that conscious partner to work
with about how you're going to allow
parenting to change you and how you're
going to just surrender to it I think is
my the way that I finally approached it
um I remember people used to ask me when
when our kids a little bit younger you
know tell me about parenting and I would
say parenting is like a deep tissue
massage if you resist it you're
[__] that's a great one that that's so
that actually reminds me of one of the
things we do is I love sitting and
watching Bluey with my daughter
occasionally not too much and we watch
it together and there's an episode where
the dad it's a cartoon right it's set in
Australia they're like dogs or whatever
but the dad is like ah I got to go to
work blah blah blah the kids want to
play the dad like basically is like all
right and so they play for a little bit
and they're playing with specifically
they have all these elaborate
imaginative rituals and the whole idea
of imaginative plays a whole other
episode that we could probably do but um
the the marker is basically like uh they
have all these markers that are
different colors and they pretend
they're like bananas or
whatever so the dad's finally kind of
like they they had a good play they
played for a little while and then The
Parting Gift from the daughter to the
dad is like wrapped up in a little piece
of paper or whatever and he goes and
he's talking to his wife and he opens it
up and his wife goes what she give you
and he opens it and it's the marker and
he looks he's like
everything and it's just like yeah what
what did our kids give us everything
it's so it's so hard to
um explain that yeah of like what that
means because it's like well how did
they give you everything it's just but
you've changed entirely the world is
different you're different everything's
transformed and um I think you're
explaining it really really well right
now
yeah but yeah so the resistance if
you're if you're resisting you're [__]
is a
thing but if you go with it it totally
changes everything yeah yeah exactly
thank you so much for having me on um
amazing to get the chance to chat with
you about this and ask you questions and
um really really beautiful to see um you
know a picture of uh what it looks like
down the road that's a that's a
beautiful picture yeah man it's total
pleasure
[Music]